## Getting Started with The Lid-Driven Cavity Flow

## The Problem

The software application is an ode to the classic two-dimensional lid-driven cavity problem, which has been extensively used in the field of CFD to validate and verify numerical methods and codes. The scenario involves a square container or cavity with a fluid inside it, where the top lid of the cavity moves at a constant velocity while the other three walls remain stationary. This lid-driven motion generates a complex flow pattern within the cavity. The top lid moves with a specified velocity, creating a shearing motion in the fluid while the walls of the cavity enforce the no-slip condition, meaning the fluid velocity is zero at the walls. The fluid inside the cavity is assumed to be incompressible and governed by the Navier-Stokes (NS) equations for two-dimensional flow. The Semi-Implicit Method for Pressure-Linked Equations (SIMPLE) algorithm is used to solve the 2D Navier-Stokes (NS) equations to determine the velocity field in a lid-driven cavity.

## The Significance

Many CFD codes have been benchmarked with this problem, which was first introduced by Ghia, Ghia, and Shin in the Journal of Computational Physics in 1982. Their publication, among others, and more importantly, their datasets, are a standard reference for verifying the accuracy, convergence, and reliability of different numerical methods that are used to solve the Navier-Stokes equations for incompressible fluid flow. The lid-driven cavity problem remains a fundamental and widely accepted benchmark in the CFD community due to its simplicity in setup, yet its ability to reveal complexities in fluid flow behavior and validate numerical methods in simulating viscous, incompressible flow in a controlled environment.

Due to their significant computational power, parallel processing capabilities, and large memory capacities, HPC clusters are used to run massive CFD simulations to model intricate fluid flow phenomena accurately. Some notable machines include Summit and Frontera. In this case, some Heroku dyno. CFD codes run on HPC clusters have been used in the design of real-world applications such as supersonic aircraft, space shuttles and rockets, and turbomachinery as well as played important roles in automotive industry innovation, weather prediction and climate modeling, and fluid dynamic applications in the biomedical industry.

## The Stack
Starting closest to the machine, the techstack starts with its computational engine, the CFD solver and integrator of the velocity field. In order to generate the positions of the particles over time, the velocity field generated by the solver needs to be integrated over a specified time interval, so I wrote another set of code in F90 to handle the ordinary differential equation (ODE). The code to integrate the velocity field to find position or displacement uses a fourth-order Runge-Kutta numerical method, RK4. In order to deal with the Taylor series of the RK4 method, I borrowed a 2D piecewise linear interpolator distributed under the GNU LGPL license from John Burkardt.

Python C/API extension modules of the solver and ODE integrator needed to be built in order to interface the solver and ODE integrator with the Flask web framework on the backend written in Python. In addition, the backend communicates with a MySQL database in order to manage data generated when users run simulations. Functions needed to be written in order to handle saving and retrieving user requests for the velocity field, particle displacements, and storage of the image source files generated by Matplotlib in a socket.io route. Socket.IO was chosen for suitability in long-polling environments as well as its room management, event-based communication, and reconnection handling features. The backend serves the frontend written in JavaScript, which controls the HTML5 template and CSS3 styles, creating the interactive and hopefully visually appealing user interface of the web application. The application uses the Mailgun to handle registration and password reset requests (commented for efficient usage, no login, etc). The PDF file is served to you using an Amazon S3 bucket.

## Usage

The software application cannot effectively be run without a Fortran compiler. Therefore, in order to view the application, please visit https://desolate-bastion-69064.herokuapp.com/.

I also prefer not to share the CFD solver publicly.

## Learn More

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_fluid_dynamics

https://engineering.purdue.edu/online/courses/numerical-methods-heat-mass-momentum-transfer

## Credits

John Bark



